95

addressing student behavior and affect
with empathy and growth mindset
shamya karumbaiah

university of massachusetts
amherst
140 governors drive
amherst, ma 01003-9264

shamya@cs.umass.edu
beverly woolf
university of massachusetts
amherst
140 governors drive
amherst, ma 01003-9264

bev@cs.umass.edu

rafael lizarralde

danielle allessio

university of massachusetts
amherst
140 governors drive
amherst, ma 01003-9264

university of massachusetts
amherst
140 governors drive
amherst, ma 01003-9264

worcester polytechnic institute
100 institute rd
worcester, ma 01609

worcester polytechnic institute
100 institute rd
worcester, ma 01609

rezecib@cs.umass.edu
ivon arroyo
iarroyo@wpi.edu

abstract
we present results of a randomized controlled study that
compared different types of affective messages delivered by
pedagogical agents. we used animated characters that were
empathic and emphasized the malleability of intelligence and
the importance of effort. results showed significant correlations between students who received more empathic messages and those who were more confident, more patient, exhibited higher levels of interest, and valued math knowledge
more. students who received more growth mindset messages, tended to get more problems correct on their first
attempt but valued math knowledge less and had lower
posttest scores. students who received more success/failure
messages tended to make more mistakes, to be less learningoriented, and stated that they were more confused. we conclude that these affective messages are powerful media to
influence students’ perceptions of themselves as learners, as
well as their perceptions of the domain being taught. we
have reported significant results that support the use of empathy to improve student affect and attitudes in a math
tutor.

keywords
student affect, empathy messages, growth mindset, pedagogical agents, intelligent tutor, confidence

1. introduction
students experience many emotions while studying and taking tests [16]. students’ emotions (such as confidence, boredom, and anxiety) can influence achievement outcomes [10,
18] and predispositions (such as low self-concept and pessimism) can diminish academic success [5, 14].

allessio@umass.edu
naomi wixon
mwixon@wpi.edu

pekrun’s control-value theory of emotion has been experimentally validated by classroom experiments that used student self-reports (answers to 5-point scale survey questions).
these experiments provide evidence that educational interventions can reduce students’ anxiety [16, 19].
dweck’s growth mindset theory suggests that students who
believe that intelligence can be increased through effort and
persistence tend to seek out academic challenges, compared
to those who view their intelligence as immutable [8, 9].
students who are praised for their effort (as opposed to performance) are more likely to view intelligence as being malleable, and their self-esteem remains stable regardless of how
hard they have to work to succeed at a task.
hattie and timperley [13] studied which types of feedback
and conditions enable learning to flourish and which cases
stifle growth. according to their study feedback is intended
to help a student get from where they are to where they need
to be. graesser et al., [12] reported that there are significant
relationships between the content of feedback dialogue and
the emotions experienced during learning. they found significant correlations between dialog and the affective states
of confusion, eureka (delight) and frustration.
pekrun et al., [17] tested a theoretical model positing that
a student’s anticipated achievement feedback in a classroom
setting influences his/her achievement goals and emotions.
for example, self-referential feedback, in which a student’s
competence is defined in terms of self-improvement, had a
positive influence on a student’s mastery goal adoption. on
the other hand, normative feedback, in which student competence is defined relative to other students’ mastery goals and
performance goals, had a positive influence on performanceapproach and performance-avoidance goal adoption. furthermore, feedback condition and achievement goals predicted test-related emotions (i.e., enjoyment, hope, pride,
relief, anger, anxiety, hopelessness, and shame).
teachers have limited opportunities to recognize and respond to individual student’s affect in typical classrooms.96

ideally, digital learning environments can manage the delicate balance between motivation and cognition, promoting
both interest and deep learning. the overwhelming majority
of work on affect-aware virtual tutors has focused on modeling affect, i.e., designing computational models capable of
detecting how students feel while they interact with intelligent tutoring systems [2]. while modeling affect is a critical
first step, very little research exists on systematically exploring the impact of interventions on students’ performance,
learning, and attitudes, i.e., how an environment might respond to students emotions (e.g., frustration, anxiety, and
boredom) as they arise. d’mello and graesser carried out
close research work on empathic characters in autotutor,
a conversational tutor that uses 3d companions to conduct
dialogs in natural language with students [6, 7, 11].

1.1

oriented goals[3]. other results indicate that empathic
characters can help decrease students’ anxiety and boredom.
our results showed that: a) student anxiety and boredom
can be reduced using simple 2d characters, as did d’mello et
al., (2007); b) these benefits are due primarily to empathy,
and secondarily to growth mindset messages; and c) indicating only success or failure is actively harmful to students,
in comparison to emphasizing the learning process and the
importance of effort.

mathspring

the testbed for this research is mathspring, an intelligent
tutor that personalizes mathematics problems, provides help
using multimedia, and effectively teaches students to improve in standardized test scores [4]. learning companions
(figure 1) in mathspring suggest to students that their effort contributes to success, and that making mistakes only
means more effort is needed. companions use about 20 different messages focused on effort and growth mindset (table 2).
to date, mathspring learning companions have provided
positive significant effects for the overall population of students and were more effective for lower achieving students
and for female students in general [2]. however, characters seemed to have been harmful to some students (e.g.,
high-achieving males), who had higher affective baselines at
pretest time and seem to have been distracted by the characters. these results suggest that affective characters should
probably be different for students who are not presently frustrated or anxious (often high achieving males). one possibility is that the behavior of the characters be adaptive to
the affective state of the student.

1.2

recognize and respond to affect

previously, we evaluated the hypothesis that tailored affective messages delivered by digital animated characters may positively impact students emotions, attitude, and learning performance. specifically, we identified concrete prescriptive principles about how to respond
to student emotion as it occurs during online learning [1, 3].
with models of student emotion, we explored mechanisms to
address negative emotions. our models predict confidence,
interest, frustration, and excitement in real-time, based on
data from hundreds of students. the gold standard was
students’ self-reported responses to questions, such as “how
confident do you feel right now?”
we found that growth mindset messages based on dweck’s
theory [9] provide an apparent boost in student math
learning [3], resulted in less performance-oriented goals
(e.g., beating classmates, instead of a self-referenced focus),
and less boredom reported on the posttest. typically
online educational systems only report correctness: “your
answer is correct/incorrect.” we discovered that such success/failure messages are correlated to higher reported anxiety and boredom, and appear to increase performance-

figure 1: learning companions respond to student
actions with gestures and messages shown both as
text and audio. above: companion shows high interest while the student views an example problem
with solution steps shown. below: companion provides a growth mindset message, encouraging the
student to put in effort to become good at math.

1.3 research goals
the research questions in this paper focus on identifying
messages that support students’ motivation to persist working on a task. which messages (see table 2) should a tutoring system send to students to encourage them to persist?
how should agents respond to negative emotions? should
students be praised when they do well? are the benefits to
student learning and emotion due to empathic or motivational aspects of the companion? what are the results on
learning and emotion of using an empathic or less empathic
companion in comparison to a companion that indicates only
success or failure?97

table 1: outcomes variables measured in the experiment. the questions on the pre- and posttest were
answered in a 5-point scale, going from “not at all” to “very much”.
interest - students’ interest in math. “are you interested when solving math problems?”
excitement - how exciting students find math. “do you feel that solving math is exciting?”
confusion - how confused students feel while solving math problems. “do you feel confident that you will
eventually be able to understand the mathematics material?”
frustration - how frustrating students find math. average of “do you get frustrated when solving math problems?” and “does solving math problems make your feel frustrated?”
learning orientation - how much students focus on learning as opposed to performance. average of “when
you are doing math exercises, is your goal to learn as much as you can?” and “do you prefer learning about things
that make you curious even if that means you have to work harder?”
performance approach goals - “do you want to show that you are better at math than your classmates?”
math value - how important do students think math is. “compared to most other activities, how important is
it or you to be good at math?”
math liking - measure of how much students like math. “do you like your math class?”
math test performance - student’s score on math questions that are representative of the content covered in
mathspring.

2.

method

we conducted a randomized controlled study to evaluate
three different types of affective messages delivered by pedagogical agents (table 2). the study took place in an urban school district in southern california with sixty-four 6th
grade students in three math classes for four class sessions,
during december 2016. on part of the first and last day,
students completed a pretest and posttest including questions related to various affective states, and questions about
mathematics. outcome variables measured from these questions are provided in table 1.
three conditions of learning companion messages were randomly assigned to students and delivered in both audio and
written form in order to increase the likelihood of exposure: 1) empathy condition for 24 students, 2) growth
mindset condition for 20 students and 3) success/failure
condition for 20 students; see table 2 for examples of the
different types of messages. for all conditions, students were
asked to self-report their frustration or confidence in a fivepoint scale every five minutes or every eight problems, which
ever came first, but only after a problem was completed.
the prompts were shown on a separate screen and invited
students to report on their frustration or confidence.
the empathy condition was set to visually reflect positive
emotion with a certain probability for each math problem
if the last student emotion report had a positive valence.
when the most recent emotion report had a negative valence, and with a certain probability, the character first visually reflected the negative emotion; then it reported an
empathy message such as “sometimes these problems make
me feel [frustrated]”, and finally a connector such as “on the
other hand”, connected with a growth mindset message such
as “i know that putting effort into problem solving and learning from hints will make our intelligence grow.” note that
only students experiencing negative emotions were exposed
to growth mindset messages, as opposed to the following
condition.
the growth mindset condition emphasized messages that
accentuate the importance of effort and perseverance in achieving success. the growth mindset condition was set to pro-

vide one of many growth mindset messages after a second incorrect attempt was made (the first incorrect attempt caused
the hint button to flash), regardless of students’ emotions.
this condition also provided occasional growth mindset messages at the beginning of a new problem.
the success/failure condition provided both traditional
success/failure messages and some more basic meta-cognitive
support for when students made mistakes (e.g., acknowledging that their answer was not correct while encouraging them
to use a hint). the success/failure condition provided students with a response if they answered a problem correctly
and also after they made a second mistake.

3.

results

out of the 64, three students’ data were discarded due to
minimal interaction with mathspring. across the n =
61 students, 21066 event log rows were recorded for three
classes over four separate days, from which several behavioral features were derived and used throughout the analysis;
our data and processing scripts can be found on github [15].
all the students completed a pretest and posttest. students
in empathy, growth mindset and success/failure conditions
received a total of 978, 763, and 882 messages respectively.
means, standard deviations and percentage shares for each
type of message are given in table 3. it is important to
note that students received messages from all categories but
their condition emphasized the corresponding message type.
for example, a student in growth mindset condition received
significantly more growth mindset messages than a student
in empathy condition. this distribution of messages means
that different students saw different amounts of each type
of message, which allows us to perform partial correlations
with respect to the counts of each message type, separating
their effects.98

table 2: examples of messages spoken by characters.
condition
empathy
growth
mindset
success/
failure

message
“don’t you sometimes get frustrated trying to solve math problems? i do. but guess what.
keep in mind that when you are struggling with are new idea or skill you are learning
something and becoming smarter.”
“hey, congratulations! your effort paid off, you got it right!”
“did you know that when we practice to learn new math skills our brain grows and gets
stronger?”
“let’s click on help, and i am sure we will learn something.”
“very good, we got another one right!”
“hmm. wrong. shall we work it out on paper?”

figure 2: time spent on a problem immediately before and after receiving the different categories of messages.

3.1

partial correlations

first, we attempted to replicate the results of our previous
exploratory work [3]. for the three message types, partial
correlations of the total number of each messages were measured for the nine posttest measures, controlling for the corresponding pretest measure, time spent in the tutor, and
message frequency (total messages heard / time spent).
table 4 shows the result of this analysis. we observe that
with exposure to more empathic messages, students exhibited higher levels of interest and valued math knowledge more (rows 1 and 7). increased interest can be viewed
as analogous to the high negative correlation with boredom
reported in our earlier work. with growth mindset messages, students valued math knowledge less and had
lower post test performance scores (rows 7 and 9).
with success/failure messages, students were less learningoriented and claimed to be more confused (rows 6 and 3).

as we see in figure 2, students tend to spend less time
on problems immediately after they receive growth mindset
or success/failure messages. in contrast, the time spent on
a problem increases slightly after receiving empathic messages. students who received more empathic and growth
mindset messages tend to answer fewer questions than do
students who received mostly success/failure message (figure 3). combined with the last plot, it looks like the students
in the empathy condition continue to invest more time on
solving problems than rushing through the problem set.

figure 3: problems seen per minute across different
pedagogies

to further understand the dynamics, we derived some intutor variables and performed partial correlations shown in
table 5. the data for this analysis was derived as per student metrics based on their interaction with mathspring.
we observed that students tend to answer significantly more
questions when in the success/failure condition and end up
making more mistakes as well (rows 4 and 5). it is important
to note that they also avoid asking for hints (row 6). it
seems like these students tend to rush through the problems
while being more careless. they also make more mistakes
when they receive more growth mindset messages (row 5).
this leads to simpler questions which they tend to get right
in the first attempt (row 1). it appears that the students
in empathy condition continue to invest more time on
solving problems than rushing through the problem set. the
number of problems seen by these students is significantly
less (row 4).99

table 3: the distribution of messages seen by students in each pedagogical conditions.
condition
empathy
growth
mindset
success/
failure

n
21

empathy messages
mean
std
%
7.48
7.0
16%

growth mindset messages
mean
std
%
9.95
7.2
21%

success/failure messages
mean
std
%
29.1
22
62%

20

0.2

0.5

0.5%

10

5

26%

27.9

19.2

73%

20

1.2

1.7

2.7%

4.6

4.8

10%

38.3

26.6

86%

table 4: partial correlations between different types of messages seen and posttest variables (table 1),
accounting for the corresponding pretest value, time spent in tutor and message frequency.
variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

interest
excitement
confusion
frustration
performance
approach
learning
orientation
math value
math liking
performance

empathy messages
corr
p
0.28*
0.03
0.00
1.00
-0.05
0.74
0.10
0.43

growth mindset messages
corr
p
0.19
0.15
-0.07
0.60
-0.05
0.74
-0.08
0.54

success/failure
corr
-0.20
-0.08
0.32*
-0.18

messages
p
0.14
0.54
0.02
0.18

-0.19

0.14

-0.05

0.70

0.20

0.12

0.02

0.85

0.02

0.88

-0.24+

0.06

0.09
0.96
0.07

-0.10
0.05
-0.13

0.25*
0.01
-0.01

0.05
0.96
0.93

+

-0.22
0.01
-0.23+

+

0.45
0.72
0.33
p ≤ 0.10, * p ≤ 0.05

table 5: partial correlations between different types of messages seen and within-tutor variables, accounting
for time spent in the tutor and message frequency.
variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

% problems solved on
first attempt
avg problem
difficulty
learning gain
problems seen
mistakes made
hints per problem

empathy messages
corr
p

growth mindset messages
corr
p

success/failure messages
corr
p

0.06

0.62

0.34**

0.007

-0.01

0.94

0.07

0.61

-0.05

0.69

0.19

0.14

-0.10
-0.23+
-0.01
0.10

0.50
0.07
0.91
0.43

-0.07
-0.04
0.59**
0.16

0.63
0.78
6e-7
0.22
+-0.14
0.34
0.77**
4e-13
0.30*
0.02
0.10
-0.22+
p ≤ 0.10, * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01

100

3.2

markov chain analysis

as students solve problems in the tutoring system, the learning companion comments on their attempts; the effect of
these messages on student affect is sequential, but the partial correlations do not capture this. to analyze this effect,
we built markov chain models using in-tutor student selfreports of confidence and frustration. each model describes
transitions in affective states, from one self-report to the
next, where students received a particular type of character messages (empathy, growth mindset, and success/failure)
between self-reports. to reduce the state space, the 5-point
scale used in the self-reports was simplified to two values confident (≥ 3), not confident (< 3); similarly for frustration.
the goal of the markov models was not to predict emotional
changes, but rather to examine whether different messages
had significant effects on affect. markov models can show
the probability of transitioning between affective states, but
also have a stationary distribution, which represents the
amount of students that would be in each state after undergoing many transitions. for example, a group of students were to use the system for many hours and receive
only empathic messages, our model suggests that 99.5% of
them would be confident about learning math (figure 4).

figure 4: state transitions between the confident
(c) and not confident (n) affective states. the stationary distribution is shown below each state. only
the empathy model was significant in the likelihood
ratio test (p ≤ 0.05)
after
empathic
message

table 6: stationary distributions in the markov
models of confidence and frustration.
message
type
empathy
growth
mindset
success/
failure

confidence
conf
not
99.5%* 0.05%*

frustration
frust
not
35%
65%

74%

26%

30%

70%

80%

20%

25%

75%
*p ≤ 0.05

4. discussion
some of our results support the hypothesis that affective
messages delivered by characters can positively impact students’ emotions and affective predispositions for math problem solving. this is particularly evident for empathy, as
the more empathic messages a student saw the higher their
interest in mathematics problem solving, as well as their beliefs that mathematics is valuable to learn (table 4). an
analysis of student behavior suggests that students who saw
a high frequency of empathic messages also tended to be
more patient and cautious with problem solving, suggesting
that empathic messages may encourage students to persist
through adversity. exposure to empathic messages was significantly correlated to investing time in each math problem activity, leading also to fewer problems seen per session. a positive trend is exhibited between high frequency
of empathic messages and hints requested, even if not significant (table 5). empirical temporal models generated from
students’ changes in self-reports of affect, within the tutor,
revealed that students receiving empathic messages have a
higher likelihood to become more confident and to remain
confident.

0.01
0.99

c
99.5%

n
0.50

0.50

0.5%

0.11

after growth
mindset
message

0.89

after
success/
failure
message

0.90

c
73%

n
0.31

0.69

27%

0.10
c
80%

n
0.39

0.61

20%

we used a likelihood ratio test to analyze the significance
of these models: the probability of the null model (ignoring
message type) generating the data divided by the probability
of the alternate model (for a particular message type) generating the data gives a p-value. figure 4 shows the state transitions for confidence in the null model and the model for
confidence after receiving empathic messages, which was
significant with p = 0.0149 (the other models were not significant). we also examined the stationary distributions for
each model (table 6).

the response to growth mindset messages delivered by characters yielded mixed results. as students saw more of these
kinds of messages they also succeeded more often at solving
problems correctly (on the first attempt); interestingly, at
the same time, they also made more mistakes. this is also
desirable, as growth mindset messages emphasize that making mistakes is okay and can even help learning, legitimizing
a high frequency of errors. it is possible that students were
using those mistakes and hints to learn and succeed later on;
a (not significant) positive trend suggests that students receiving more of these kinds of messages also asked for more
hints per problem. in contrast, marginally significant effects
suggest that a high frequency of growth mindset messages
might be detrimental to students’ perception of math value,
and that their posttest performance is worse when they receive more of this kind of messages. it is hard to conclude
the meaning of these marginally significant effects, especially
because a previous study suggested that these messages were
beneficial in general [3]. note that empathic messages used
’growth mindset’ messages also, in order to resolve the negative emotion (see table 2). one possible explanation is that
the empathic condition was so positive because it was also
very selective at showing growth mindset messages for only
those who experienced negative emotions. it is likely that
high achieving students, or those who “felt ok”, rejected
growth mindset messages that they might have perceived to
be unnecessary.101

an important comment is that we did not expect that success/failure messages could be so harmful to students. regardless of whether messages indicated success or failure, as
students received more of these messages they also exhibited
lower levels of mastery/learning orientation at posttest time.
they also reported higher levels of confusion at posttest time
(note that the confusion can be positive for learning within
the learning experience, but not after the learning experience has concluded). regarding behavior within the tutor,
the more students were exposed to success/failure messages,
the more they appeared to rush through problems, make
mistakes, and request fewer hints per problem.
to summarize, empathy messages were associated with variables consistent with methodical work and an increased interest/value of mathematics. however, both growth mindset
and success/failure messages appeared to be associated with
a greater number of mistakes. finally, success/failure messages themselves were associated with a whole host of concerning behaviors such as confusion with the material following posttest, reduced learning orientation, hurried work, and
a reduced likelihood of requesting hints. this is consistent
with dweck’s findings that growth mindset messages are superior to success/failure messages [8, 9]. whether empathic
messages in fact result in improved student performance pre
to posttest will likely require larger samples than this small
study (n = 61). however, students in non-empathic conditions have demonstrated significantly more mistakes in their
work.

5.

conclusions

this research emphasizes the importance of understanding
an intervention’s effect on a student’s affective state, which
in turn is connected to engagement, performance, and learning. although many researchers have focused on modeling
affect, very little research effort has been put into systematically measuring the impact of the intervention on the student behavior in an adaptive learning environment. empathic messages that respond to students’ recent emotions
have resulted in superior results both in improving the student interaction with the system and in the overall learning
experience. growth mindset follows next with some positive impact on in-tutor performance but its overall effect
in the short-term is questionable. success/failure messages
are generally harmful to students: reducing learning orientation, increasing confusion, and making students more
careless during the learning experience.
we conclude that affective messages delivered by characters in online tutoring environments are a very important
medium for building student-tutor rapport in a virtual environment, powerful signals that influence perceptions of students themselves as learners, as well as perceptions of the
domain being taught. we have reported significant results
that support the use of empathy to improve student affect
and attitudes in a math tutor. the long-term effect of these
messages needs to be studied when the novelty of this intervention wears off. in the future, we hope to study the
impact of the frequency and content of these messages. to
evaluate the generalizability of these results, student populations across different demographics needs to be studied as
well as the applicability of the messages to domains beyond
mathematics.

6.

acknowledgments

this research is supported by the national science foundation (nsf) 1324385 iis/cyberlearning dip: collaborative
research: impact of adaptive interventions on student affect, performance, and learning. any opinions, findings,
and conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of nsf.

7.

additional authors

additional authors: winslow burleson (new york university, 70 washington square south new york, new york,
10012; email: wb50@nyu.edu).

8.

references

[1] i. arroyo, w. burleson, m. tai, k. muldner, and b. p.
woolf. gender differences in the use and benefit of
advanced learning technologies for mathematics.
journal of educational psychology, 105(4):957, 2013.
[2] i. arroyo, d. g. cooper, w. burleson, b. p. woolf,
k. muldner, and r. christopherson. emotion sensors
go to school. in aied, volume 200, pages 17–24, 2009.
[3] i. arroyo, s. schultz, n. wixon, k. muldner,
w. burleson, and b. p. woolf. addressing affective
states with empathy and growth mindset. 6th
international workshop on personalization
approaches in learning environments, 2016.
[4] i. arroyo, b. p. woolf, w. burelson, k. muldner,
d. rai, and m. tai. a multimedia adaptive tutoring
system for mathematics that addresses cognition,
metacognition and affect. international journal of
artificial intelligence in education, 24(4):387–426,
2014.
[5] l. corno and r. e. snow. adapting teaching to
individual differences among learners. handbook of
research on teaching, 3(605-629), 1986.
[6] s. d’mello and a. graesser. automatic detection of
learner’s affect from gross body language. applied
artificial intelligence, 23(2):123–150, 2009.
[7] s. d’mello and a. graesser. autotutor and affective
autotutor: learning by talking with cognitively and
emotionally intelligent computers that talk back.
acm transactions on interactive intelligent systems
(tiis), 2(4):23, 2012.
[8] c. s. dweck. self-theories: their role in motivation,
personality, and development. psychology press, 2000.
[9] c. s. dweck. beliefs that make smart people dumb.
why smart people can be so stupid, 24:41, 2002.
[10] d. goleman. emotional intelligence. why it can
matter more than fq. learning, 24(6):49–50, 1996.
[11] a. c. graesser, p. chipman, b. c. haynes, and
a. olney. autotutor: an intelligent tutoring system
with mixed-initiative dialogue. ieee transactions on
education, 48(4):612–618, 2005.
[12] a. c. graesser, s. k. d’mello, s. d. craig,
a. witherspoon, j. sullins, b. mcdaniel, and
b. gholson. the relationship between affective states
and dialog patterns during interactions with
autotutor. journal of interactive learning research,
19(2):293, 2008.
[13] j. hattie and h. timperley. the power of feedback.
review of educational research, 77(1):81–112, 2007.102

[14] a. n. kluger and a. denisi. feedback interventions:
toward the understanding of a double-edged sword.
current directions in psychological science, 7(3):67–72,
1998.
[15] r. lizarralde and s. karumbaiah. a collection of
scripts for processing mathspring data. https:
//github.com/rezecib/mathspringdataprocessing,
2017.
[16] r. pekrun. emotions and learning. international
academy of education. australia: international
bureau of education, 2014.
[17] r. pekrun, a. cusack, k. murayama, a. j. elliot, and
k. thomas. the power of anticipated feedback:
effects on students’ achievement goals and
achievement emotions. learning and instruction,
29:115–124, 2014.
[18] r. pekrun, t. goetz, l. m. daniels, r. h. stupnisky,
and r. p. perry. boredom in achievement settings:
exploring control-value antecedents and performance
outcomes of a neglected emotion. journal of
educational psychology, 102(3):531, 2010.
[19] r. pekrun, e. vogl, k. r. muis, and g. m. sinatra.
measuring emotions during epistemic activities: the
epistemically-related emotion scales. cognition and
emotion, pages 1–9, 2016.